Welcome to our Epic Failures in Evolution
series.
I am your host Rich Deem of GodAndScience.org.
Our third epic failure in evolution is on
Ontogeny Recapitulates Phylogeny.
In my 1968 high school biology course, we
were taught that this concept was true; that
the ontogeny or developmental process went
through stages of a species phylogeny or the
pathway by which the species had evolved.
The modern version of the theory comes from
a concept first developed by Karl von Baer
in 1828.
According to this theory embryos go through
a kind of evolutionary hourglass, in which
different species pass through a common, phylotypic
stage, before going on to differentiate into
their respective species.
This idea was made famous by Ernst Haeckel,
whose drawings of embryos probably made it
into the textbook you studied in high school.
These are the species supposedly depicted
by these drawings.
In the tailbud stage, all the embryos were
supposed to look alike.
There are contemporary scientists and textbooks
that promote this idea.
Butler and Juurlink say, "Embryos of different
species [of vertebrate] pass through identical
embryonic stages before acquiring their specific
features."
However, even in the 19th century Haeckel
had his critics.
Adam Sedgwick said that a blind man could
distinguish between vertebrate embryos.
Despite criticisms, no scientists really looked
closely at the idea until this paper was published
in 1997.
The following slides look at embryonic development
of different classes of vertebrates as shown
in this paper.
These are comparisons of different fish embryos,
all photographed at the same scale at the
tailbud stage of development.
As you can see, there is quite a bit of variability
even within different species of fish.
And these are different species of amphibia.
And here we have different species of reptiles.
And here are several species of birds.
And finally, we have different species of
mammalian embryos.
And this is a comparison of Haeckel's drawings
to photographs of what the respective species
really look like.
Obviously, Ernst Haeckel fudged his drawings
just a little.
So, in conclusion, there is no common phylotypic
stage for vertebrate embryos and Ernst Haeckel
"Photoshopped" his drawings.
Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny is an evolutionary
epic failure!
More information can be found online at our
website, GodAndScience.org.
Thanks for watching and be sure to sign-up
for updates from our YouTube channel.